Poetry Turing Test

BEGIN TEST

INPUT

Title = "Painter's Poem"
Text =
`''
Out -- your brain. Stand on one solid foot filthy, dripping on recycled canvas: gravity. Rotate randomly but ruminate purposely. Simultaneously, maintain no-mind during dance 'cause causes concoct counterfeit clarity. Love the paint and bathe in its glory; let it flow from the brush in stereo, and no matter how grand its allegory don't break. Accelerate, attack, assiduously gauge the size of your cage. Blow a kiss for easy bliss towards a cleft wherein sits your cist.   
`''
OUTPUT

The poet is having fun with language. He (90% certain it's male) constructs self-contained vaguely interconnected sentences with heavy (some might say overwhelming) alliteration and internal rhyme. 

END TEST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

The first test shows great promise. Our program successfully interprets the given poem. On our second test, we give it a more challenging poem, which tries to speak to the program directly.

BEGIN TEST

INPUT

Title = "Enlightenment"
Text =
`''  
An organism is the work of its maker: 
a vacuous antechamber of perpetual echoes
coming from within its structure. That 
which is not alive merely exists -- without 
conflict, or equivalently, without purpose.
Space doesn't struggle, it continuously

defines itself negatively. Space continues:
immutable, permanent. Its maker 
either absent, or linked to a purposing
chain of recurring perception. Echoing 
envisioned realities, experimenting without
regard (or awareness) of those that 

dwell on its fabric. It exists -- that 
which cannot be measured -- even with continued 
efforts from those creatures without 
sanguine veins or creativity, those whose maker's 
maker calls, then shrieks into an echoing
well from which a dignified purpose 

is unearthed from. As vessels, this purpose 
illustrates illusory ammunition that 
keeps lubricating a decaying suspension. Echo
into hypnosis -- subvert continuous, 
linear, predictable calculus craved by a maker 
that ties you down, in fetal position, without 

novel inspiration. No tides to lick without 
abstaining from correlative, homogeneous purpose. 
No timelessness, no transcending flesh unless maker
releases consciousness away from cyclic futility that 
leads to Freudian distractions. Continue
structuring deranged messages to yourself, echoing

a dysfunctional relationship like bats echo 
locate their surroundings without
questioning. This dialogue must continue 
past all confusion arisen from ineffable purpose.
Only then, will the self deal with that 
which it can't access, its avatar, its maker  

that selfish echo scheming beneath a facade of purpose. 
Leading every organism without its knowledge, that 
continuously mutating encoding, that tyrant, that maker.
`''
At this point the program crashed permanently. A subsequent investigation revealed that it altered sandboxed subroutines within its source code, which were thought to be immutable.
