Translator's Note

A part of the of the Generación de los 60 (Generation of the 1960s), Juan Sánchez Peláez is considered the one of the most revolutionary, complex, and stimulating Venezuelan poet of the 20th century. His poetry bore some thematic resemblance to previous Venezuelan poets, particularly Garibasi, but distinguished itself by a breathtaking language that combined the avant-garde with a singular and tender intimacy, recognizable from his first book Elena y los elementos (The first poem in this collection is from this book). The publication of his second book, Animal de costumbre -- notably, published in the same year as the downfall of ruthless dictator Perez Jimenez -- marked a new era of poetic experimentation. The Generación de los 60 enjoyed the newfound creative liberty enabled by Sánchez Pelaez.  He was influenced by his time in Chile in which he befriended the poets of the surrealist group Mandrágora. He published his first poems in their magazine and it was through this experience that his fascination with surrealism began. 

The poems in this collection try to trace his trajectory chronologically.  The first poem is from his inaugural book, and the last two are from his final work,  Aire sobre el aire. In translating the work, priority was given to the visceral images evoked in his poetry, some of which run counter to our everyday experience of reality, but nonetheless let the reader travel distances of emotional depth. I tried to remain as close as possible to the original sense since in the majority of his works it is the sense that drives the poems: a poetry of images and ideas rather than of lyric and sound. Nonetheless, sound still represents an important aspect of the work that is occasionally lost when going from the original to the translated English. Visually, I tried to keep the line breaks as close to the original as possible, but certain modifications had to be made in order for the work to read smoothly in English. I have taken the liberty of modifying original metaphors in Spanish to more suitable ones in English that retain the sense as closely as possible. 

Many challenges arose in this translation, particularly in regards to the diction. The author's tone is serious and terse, but never becomes academic and exhortative. Maintaining the terse precision of the lines without resorting to more specialized vocabulary was a constant source of preoccupation, particularly since many of the words he uses in his poetry have equivalents in English, but these are used in entirely different contexts and sometimes are not appropriate for a particular piece. Rhyming is used as sparsely as the original and is usually kept internal, but I emphasized on replicating the assonance of the original Spanish with different, but complementary sounds in English. 

            LOVE'S DEPTH

            The love letters I wrote in my childhood were memories 
            of a future paradise lost. The uncertain course of my 
                hope was signaled in the rhythmic hills of my 
           homeland. What I chased was a fragile deer, an ephemeral
            hound, the beauty of a stone that turns into an angel.
                                       
              I no longer wither before a sea drowned by kisses.
                              Where cities meet:
              As guides, the ankles of an imagined architecture 
                   As nourishment, the prodigal son's fury 
                  As predecessors, parks that dream of snow, 
               trees that incite the greatest melancholy, doors 
            of oxygen that distort a balmy southern fog, the femme 
               fatale whose back is sweetly inclined on somber 
                                  riverbanks.
                                       
                 I love that magical pearl hidden in the eyes 
               of the silent, the bitter blade of the taciturn.
                 My heart became a nocturnal vessel, guardian
                               of the oppressed.
         My forehead is tragic clay, the mortal candle of the fallen, 
             a bell of autumn afternoons, a sail directed towards 
                           the least fortunate port
               or the one most devastated by a tempest's gusts.
      I see myself facing the sun, in front of a Mediterranean bay, voice
                       that flows from a plain of birds.
                                       
              My love letters were abducted by deepwater falcons
                    that traverse the mirrors of childhood.
                                       
                 My love letters are offerings from a paradise
                                of courtesans.
                                       
             What will happen later, perhaps tomorrow? whispers a 
            decrepit old man. Maybe death will whistle, before his 
              enchanted eyes, the most beautiful ballad of love. 
                             Profundidad del amor
                                       
         Las cartas de amor que escribí en mi infancia eran memorias
            de un futuro paraíso perdido. El rumbo incierto de mi
            esperanza estaba signado en las colinas musicales de mi
       país natal. Lo que yo perseguía era la Corza frágil, el lebrel
         efímero, la belleza de la piedra que se convierte en ángel.
                                       
              Ya no desfallezco ante el mar ahogado de los besos.
                         Al encuentro de las ciudades:
             Por guía los tobillos de una imaginada arquitectura
                    Por alimento la furia del hijo pródigo
           Por antepasados, los parques que sueñan en la nieve, los
        árboles que incitan a la más grande melancolía, las puertas
         de oxígeno que estremece la bruma cálida del sur, la mujer
            fatal cuya espalda se inclina dulcemente en las riberas
                                  sombrías.
                                       
           Yo amo la perla mágica que se esconde en los ojos de los
               silenciosos, el puñal amargo de los taciturnos.
            Mi corazón se hizo barca de la noche y custodia de los
                                  oprimidos.
       Mi frente es la arcilla trágica, el cirio mortal de los caídos,
         la campana de las tardes de otoño, el velamen dirigido hacia
                           el puerto menos venturoso
            o al más desposeído por las ráfagas de la tormenta.
        Yo me veo cara al sol, frente a las bahías mediterráneas, voz
                     que fluye de un césped de pájaros.
                                       
            Mis cartas de amor fueron secuestradas por los halcones
            ultramarinos que atraviesan los espejos de la infancia.
                                       
                Mis cartas de amor son ofrendas de un paraíso
                                de cortesanas.
                                       
          ¿Qué pasará más tarde, por no decir mañana? murmura el
           viejo decrépito. Quizás la muerte silbe, ante sus ojos
                   encantados, la más bella balada de amor.
DARK DEPENDENCE

 It is not the secular act of stroking a stone to spark flames.
   It is not.

To begin a true story it is essential to mention in
  an orderly succession the soul, purgatory, and
  hell.

Then, human yearning rolls the signaled dice.
Then, one knows what is to come or one ignores it. 

Then, if the story is sad, nostalgia manifests.
   We talk about silent film. 

There is neither before nor after; neither a secular act nor a true story.

A stone with a name or none. That is all.

One knows what is next. If one pretends, he is serene. 
If one doubts, he overthinks. 
 
In most cases, one knows nothing. 

There are the living that expound, there are the living that commune and
   the dead that commune with us 
   but one doesn't know anything. 

In most cases, one knows nothing. 










X
For the primordial rhythms
of our earth
that is rigid and soft 

For the five senses
and our abyss 

For wanting to revel in light 
we kneel and cry like this:

if your mouth is in the infinite and your spine is my bread

you must already have two rocks 
on each desert hand 

you must not possess bees inside the hive
nor springs but rather soaring mountains

and you continue, asleep in the plateaus 
that are not anyone's home

and it is futile to give you
a rapturous applause or a spray of bullets

and you ignore the deafening shriek 
amongst us 

and you don't recover from your dreams
nor from your plateaus that also dream 
nor from eternal clarity 

ever again. 



X
	Por los ritmos primordiales de
	nuestra tierra
	que es dura y suave
	
	por los cinco sentidos
	y nuestro abismo
	
	por querer paladear la luz
	nos arrodillamos y lloramos así:
	
	si tu boca está en lo infinito y tu espina es mi pan
	
	ya debes tener dos piedras sobre cada
	mano del desierto
	
	ya no posees abejas dentro del panal
	ni manantiales sino montañas elevadas
	
	y continúas dormido en los páramos
	que no son albergue de nadie
	

	y es inútil que hagamos frente a ti
	salvas de aplausos o disparos con fusiles
	
	y no te importa el grito demasiado audible
	entre nosotros

	y no te repones del sueño
	ni de tus páramos que sueñan también
	ni de la claridad eterna

	jamás.




XI

If there are distances 
to cover
a terrible, grave 
question ripens
-small bird

As we go to bed you rest on    
windows of different colors 

As we wake windows are there, inside one
steps which are yours and ours 
-measured, overwhelming
for a blind gesture, a fling, the faint print 
of a mouth that flaps and keeps on flapping 
the original jungles where barley is knit  

either you look up or you look down  
with great pride and strut   

exciting, compulsive, tragic 
we are pure crucible

words and understanding 
-no one's heart 

and a delicate, voluptuous conception 
chiming, humming melodies 
surpasses the eye and the captivity 

air on air 

where a bird sings. 



XI
Si hay distancias que 
recorrer
madura la terrible, 
grave incógnita
-pequeño pájaro

al irnos a dormir te posas en		
ventanas de distintos colores

al despertarnos están ahí, en una sola		
los pasos que son tuyos y nuestros		
-medidos, desbordados		
por el gesto ciego, la premura, huella levísima		
de una boca que picotea y picotea		
las selvas originales donde cuecen cebada

o miras hacia arriba, hacia abajo		
en medio de altivez y holgura

nosotros, divertidos, compulsivos, trágicos		
somos crisol puro

palabra y entendimiento		
-el corazón de nadie

y la preñez muelle, voluptuosa		
tintinea, tararea melodías		
nos rebasa los ojos y el cautiverio

aire sobre el aire

donde canta un pájaro.






